when you hear the word technology you
probably think of complex electronic
gadgets state-of-the-art medical
innovations even space-age advances in
communication but for a huge group of
people whose farming practices have gone
unchanged for centuries life changing
technology can be as simple as a piece
of plastic tubing currently 1.2 billion
people in the world live on less than a
dollar a day 800 million of them are
small holder farmers nearly a quarter of
which live in India these farmers rely
on agriculture for subsistence and
income and for them water scarcity in
rural and remote areas is a critical
issue Global easy water products or GE
WP a for-profit company based in
aurangabad India supplies smallholder
farmers with inexpensive micro or drip
irrigation systems designed to improve
their productivity historically
irrigation technologies were designed
only for mid to large-sized farms GE
WPP's parent organization I de indias
took over 20 years of research testing
and user feedback to develop products
designed specifically for the needs of
smallholder farmers branded as kb drip
kris chuck bamboo or farmers friend the
system is easy to install requiring
little training and minimal upkeep
farmers can implement kV drip at a small
scale and expanded over time with the
income it generates drip irrigation
optimizes productivity by delivering
water directly to the roots of a plant
versus traditional irrigation techniques
like flooding farmers using drip see
dramatically higher yields through more
cultivable land an increase in the
quality and value of their crops greater
diversity and an enormous reduction of
labor and input costs with water savings
up to fifty percent
with these reductions in costs and
increases in income the drip systems pay
for themselves in less than a year to
date GE WP has helped raise the incomes
of the farmers it serves by an average
of four hundred dollars a year helping
to move them out of the grips of poverty
together GE WP and I de indias have
served more than 250,000 smallholder
farmers positively impacting the lives
of over 1 million people and even more
promising as this technology begins to
scale within India markets are emerging
that extend beyond its borders in
Pakistan one entrepreneur has had the
vision to adopt this technology for the
thousands of remote villages in the arid
desert the company called micro drip
purchases systems from GE WP and
distributes their kb drug products to
rural smallholder farmers in the region
for the first time farmers are growing
crops like eggplant squash and tomatoes
and in some instances doubling their
annual harvest rajan is such a farmer he
and his sons struggled to scratch out a
livelihood on their barren lands until
they took a risk and purchased a drip
irrigation system in a single harvest
they grew entire fields of sunflowers
some seven feet tall earning their
family more than ever before
state-of-the-art technology is not
limited to the upper ends of the market
in fact technology for the poorest
customers needs to be even more
innovative to make products small
affordable and scalable over time such
innovations have an exponential impact
with the opportunity to change the lives
of millions